---
layout: exhibit
title: 'Religion'
author: Megan Eaton Robb
publish_date: 2021-08-18
permalink: /exhibits/religion/
---
<p>Elizabeth Sharaf un-Nisa was Muslim, judging from her name, the names of her brothers (Daim Beg, Alim Beg, and Qaim Beg), and their use of Persian which often invoked Allah and the Prophet. However, it is also important to consider that oral histories have been passed down within the family, reporting she was the daughter of a Raja, or even a Maharaja, of Purnea. These oral histories have been interpreted to indicate that she was Hindu. Although typically Rajas are thought to be Hindu rulers, there was a Muslim Raja of Purnea in the late 1760s when Ducarel arrived in the area (for instance, Muhammad Ali Khan, the brother of Reza Khan, the Naib Nazim of Bengal, was called Raja of Purnea).</p>
<p>G.G. Ducarel associated with Charles Grant, an influential figure in the East India Company who notoriously advocated for the power of Christianity to bring cultivation to native peoples. This may have been a factor in encouraging his cohabitant Sharaf un-Nisa to convert. It is clear that she converted to Christianity, a decision that would have made it easier for her to become English and join her children in England. She wrote sections of Christian cultural texts in her penmanship notebook, owned a crucifix that is preserved in this collection, attended church in Newland, made frequent references to God in her English correspondence, and was buried in a Christian church.</p>
<p>Before he took up his post in Purnea, G.G. Ducarel believed sincerely in his ability to transform Indian societies for the better. When he informed his brother-in-law of his appointment to Purnea, he indicated a sense of obligation and a belief in English superiority to native peoples:</p>
<p class="quotation">“I have lately received a very honorable and creditable appointment. The governor and  council having found it absolutely necessary to appoint English Gentlemen to reside in the different provinces of Bengall to superintend the conduct of the black people there. Nominations have in general fallen upon such people as were acquainted with the language and conversent in the revenues. The country of Purnea a district of some eminence wherein I have been twice employed for the adjustment and investigation of the Revenues has been allotted to me under the name of supravisor. I shall shortly set off for my appointment where I have a good house and shall have everything comfortable about me with an assistant and a small family sufficient to make a society nor do I care, entre nous, if they will let me stay there these five years, an <u>immense</u> task is allotted to us – We are to investigate the state of our respective Provinces under the different heads of history, trade, revenue, and administration of Justice. [...] we shall have in our power to perform the noblest task that can be allotted to men of honor and humanity – that of changing the condition of the people from a state of oppression to happiness and the country from desolation to prosperity and that the scheme will in general have this effect is undoubted by the advantage English gentlemen have over Natives of this country in education principles and disposition.”</p>
<p class="quotation">G.G. Ducarel to Robert Sutton, 1769 (Murshidabad), Gloucestershire Archive. D2091/F11/13</p>
<p>Elizabeth Sharaf un-Nisa had at least one friend who wrote to her after she left India, hinting at difficulties in her adjustment to English society. Ann, who also may have been a native woman or mixed race, was the wife of Assistant Surgeon James Collie of Burdwan. Ann, who would go on to name one of her daughters after Elizabeth, admired her friend’s determination to join G.G. Ducarel in England:</p>
<p class="quotation">“I sincerely hope my dear Mrs. D you are reconciled to the customs and manners of Europe, and that you have received the attention and kindness, such amazing efforts as you have made deserve –you can’t conceive the extreme pleasure it will give us to hear of your health and happiness.”</p>
<p class="quotation"><i>Ann Collie to Elizabeth Ducarel, 1 December 1784, Burdwan</i></p>
